<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>EPILOGUE</h2>
			<blockquote>
				<p><span class="smcap">Scene</span>: <i>The epilogue setting is the same as used in Act I. Instead of it being</i> <span class="smcap">Domin’s</span> <i>office, it is now become a laboratory for</i> <span class="smcap">Alquist</span>. <i>A big chair facing up stage, down Right. A desk laden with books at Right Center. A chair at the desk. At Left Center is a white enamel table containing test tubes, glass bottles, and a microscope on downstage table. A door down</i> <small>L.</small> <i>A door down</i> <small>R.</small>, <i>leading into dissecting room.</i></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> (<i>Seated at table</i> <small>R.C.</small>, <i>turning pages of book</i>) Oh, God, shall I never find it? Never? Gall, Hallemeier, Fabry, how were the Robots made? Why did you leave not a trace of the secret? Lord, if there are no human beings left, at least let there be Robots. At least the shadow of man. (<i>Turning pages</i>) If I could only sleep. Dare I sleep before life has been renewed? Night again. Are the stars still there? Of what use are the stars? When there are no human beings. (<i>Examining a test tube</i>) Nothing. No. No. I must find it. I must search. I must never stop, never stop⁠—search⁠—search⁠—(<i>KNOCK at door</i> <small>L.</small>) Who is it? (<i>Enter a</i> <span class="smcap">Robot Servant</span>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Servant.</span> Master, the committee of Robots is waiting to see you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> I can see no one.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Servant.</span> It is the <i>Central</i> Committee, Master, just arrived from abroad.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Well, well, send them in. (<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Servant</span> <small>L.</small>) No time⁠—so little done. (<i>Re-enter</i> <span class="smcap">Servant</span> <i>with</i> <span class="smcap">Radius</span> <i>and group of</i> <span class="smcap">Robots</span>. <i>They stand in group</i> <small>L.</small> <i>and</i> <small>C.</small>, <i>silently waiting.</i>) What do you want? Be quick; I have no time.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> Master, the machines will not do the work. We cannot manufacture Robots. (<i>Other</i> <span class="smcap">Robots</span> <i>remain two abreast at</i> <small>L.C.</small>, <i>right foot forward.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">1st Robot.</span> We have striven with all our might. We have obtained a billion tons of coal from the earth. Nine million spindles are running by day and by night. There is no longer room for all we have made. This we have accomplished in one year.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> For whom?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> For future generations⁠—so we thought. But we cannot make Robots to follow us. The machines produce only shapeless clods. The skin will not adhere to the flesh, nor the flesh to the bones.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">2nd Robot.</span> Eight million Robots have died this year. Within twenty years none will be left.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">1st Robot.</span> Tell us the secret of life.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> Silence is punishable with death.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Kill me, then.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> (<i>Two steps to</i> <small>C.</small>, <i>followed by</i> <span class="smcap">Others</span>⁠—<i>open hands, close when stopped</i>) Through me, the governments of the Robots of the world commands you to deliver up Rossum’s formula. (<i>Gesture of despair from</i> <span class="smcap">Alquist</span>.) Name your price. (<i>Silence</i>) We will give you the earth. We will give you the endless possessions of the earth. (<i>Silence</i>) Make your own conditions.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> I have told you to find human beings.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> There are none left.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> I told you to search in the wilderness, upon the mountains.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> We have sent ships and expeditions without number. They have been everywhere in the world. There is not a single human left.</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Not even one? Why did you destroy them?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> We had learnt everything and could do everything. It had to be.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">2nd Robot.</span> We had to become the masters.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> Slaughter and domination are necessary if you would be human beings. Read history.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">1st Robot.</span> Teach us to multiply or we perish.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> If you desire to live, you must breed like animals.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">1st Robot.</span> You made us sterile. We cannot beget children. Therefore, teach us how to make Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> Why do you keep from us the secret of our own increase?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> It is lost.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> It was written down.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> It was⁠—(<i>Rising</i>) burnt. (<span class="smcap">All</span> <i>draw back one step in consternation.</i>) I am the last human being, Robots, and I do not know what the others knew. (<i>Sits.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> Then make experiments. Evolve the formula again.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> I tell you I cannot. I am only a builder. I work with my hands. I have never been a learned man. I cannot create life.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> Try. Try.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> If you only knew how many experiments I have made already.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">1st Robot.</span> Then show us what we must do. The Robots can do anything that human beings show them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> I can show you nothing. Nothing I do will make life proceed from these test tubes.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> Experiment, then, on live Robots. Experiment, then, on us.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> It would kill you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> You shall have all you need. A hundred of us. A thousand of us.</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> No, no. Stop, stop.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> I tell you to take live bodies. Find out how we are made.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Am I to commit murder? See how my finger shakes. I cannot even hold the scalpel. No, no, I will not.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> Take live bodies, live bodies. (<i>Walks toward</i> <span class="smcap">Alquist</span>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Have mercy, Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> Live bodies. (<i>Right hand up over</i> <span class="smcap">Alquist</span>. <i>All</i> <span class="smcap">Robots’</span> <i>left arms still back.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> (<i>Rising</i>) You will have it. Into the dissecting with you, then (<i>Hits</i> <span class="smcap">Radius</span> <i>on the chest.</i> <span class="smcap">Radius</span> <i>draws back.</i>) Ah, you are afraid of death.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> I? Why should I be chosen?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> So you will not.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> I will.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Strip him. Lay him on the table. (<span class="smcap">Radius</span> <i>goes off</i> <small>R.</small>, <i>both fists closed. Other</i> <span class="smcap">Robots</span> <i>follow, then</i> <span class="smcap">Alquist</span>) God, give me strength. God, give me strength. If only this murder is not in vain.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> (<i>Off</i> <small>R.</small>) Ready, begin.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> (<i>Off</i> <small>R.</small>) God, give me strength. (<i>Comes on, horrified</i>) No, no. I will not. I cannot. (<i>Sits</i> <small>R.C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">1st Robot.</span> (<i>Appearing in door</i>) The Robots are stronger than you. (<i>Exits</i> <small>R.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Oh, Lord, let not mankind perish from the earth. (<i>Falls asleep, and after the count of ten,</i> <span class="smcap">Primus</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Helena</span>, <i>hand in hand, enter</i> <small>L.</small> <i>and go to</i> <small>R.C.</small>; <i>look at</i> <span class="smcap">Alquist</span>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> The man has fallen asleep, Primus.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> Yes, I know. (<i>Crosses to</i> <small>L.</small> <i>of table</i> <small>L.C.</small>) Look, Helena.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> All these little tubes. What does he do with them?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> He experiments. Don’t touch them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> I’ve seen him looking into this.</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> That is a microscope.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Look, Primus, what are all these figures? (<i>Turns a page in book on table.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> (<i>Examining the book</i>) That is the book the old man is always reading. (<i>SUNRISE.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> I do not understand those things. (<i>Goes to window</i>) Primus.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> (<i>Still at table</i>) What?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> The sun is rising.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> (<i>Still reading</i>) I believe this is the most important thing in the world, Helena. This is the secret of life.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Oh, Primus, don’t bother with the secret of life. What does it matter to you? Come and look quick.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> (<i>Goes to</i> <small>R.</small> <i>of window</i>) What is it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> See how beautiful the sun is rising. I feel so strange today. It’s as if I was in a dream. I feel an aching in my body, in my heart, all over me. Primus, perhaps I’m going to die.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> Do you not sometimes feel that it would be better to die? You know, perhaps even now we are only sleeping. Last night in my sleep I again spoke to you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> In your sleep?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> Yes. We spoke a strange new language.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What about?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> I did not understand it myself, and yet I know I have never said anything more beautiful. And when I touched you I could have died. Even the place was different from any other place in the world.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> I, too, have found a place, Primus. It is very strange. Human beings dwelt there once, but now it is overgrown with weeds.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> What did you find there?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> A cottage and a garden and two dogs. They licked my hands, Primus, and their puppies. Oh, Primus, take them in your arms and fondle them and think of nothing and care for nothing else all day long, and when I am there in the garden I feel there may be something⁠—What am I for, Primus?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> I do not know, but you are beautiful.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What, Primus?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> You are beautiful, Helena, and I am stronger than all the Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Am I beautiful? Of what <i>use</i> is it to be beautiful? Look, your head is different from mine. So are your shoulders⁠—and your lips. Oh, your hair is mussed. I will smooth it. (<i>Keeps her hand on his head</i>) No one else feels to my touch as you do.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> (<i>Embarrassing her</i>) Do you not sometimes feel your heart beating suddenly, Helena, and think how something must happen?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What could happen to us, Primus? Look at yourself. (<i>Laughs.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> (<i>Awakes</i>) Laughter? Laughter, human beings. (<i>Getting up</i>) Who has returned? Who are you?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> The Robot Primus.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> (<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Helena</span>) What? A Robot? Who are you?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> The Robotess Helena. (<i>Shies away</i> <small>L.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> What? You are timid, shy? (<i>Starts to touch her</i>) Let me see you, Robotess.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> Sir, do not frighten her. (<i>Steps forward.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> What, you would protect her? Laughter⁠—timidity⁠—protection⁠—I must test you further. Take the girl into the dissecting room.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> Why?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> I wish to experiment on her.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> Upon⁠—Helena?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Of course. Don’t you hear me? Or must I call <i>someone else</i> to take her in?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> If you do, I will kill you. (<i>Steps toward</i> <span class="smcap">Alquist</span>.)</p>
			<p class="right">(<i>WARN Curtain.</i>)</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Kill me⁠—kill me, then. What will your future be?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> Sir, take me. I am made on the same day as she is. Take my life, sir. (<i>Step to</i> <span class="smcap">Alquist</span>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> No, no, you shall not.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Wait, girl, wait. (<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Primus</span>) Do you not wish to live, then?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> Not without her. I will not live without her.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Very well, I will use <i>you</i>. Into the dissecting room with you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Primus. Primus. (<i>She bursts into tears and moves</i> <small>R.</small> <span class="smcap">Alquist</span> <i>stops her.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Child, child, you can weep. Tears. What is Primus to you? One Primus more or less in the world⁠—what does it matter?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> I will go myself.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Where? Into the dissecting room?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Crosses to</i> <small>R.</small>) Yes. In there⁠—to be cut. (<span class="smcap">Primus</span> <i>stops her from going.</i>) Let me pass, Primus, let me pass.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> You shall not go in there, Helena.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> If you go in there and I do not, I will kill myself.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> (<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Alquist</span>) I will not let you. Man you shall kill neither of us.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Why?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Primus.</span> We⁠—we⁠—belong to each other.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Go. (<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Primus</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Helena</span> <small>L.</small>) Adam⁠—Eve.</p>
			<p class="center">CURTAIN</p>
			<hr class="chap"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
