<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>ACT TWO</h2>
			<blockquote>
				<p><span class="smcap">Scene</span>: <span class="smcap">Helena’s</span> <i>drawing room. Ten years later. The skeleton framework of Act I is still used. Tall windows put in back instead of Act I windows. Steel shutters for these windows. Where the green cabinet of Act I at Left has stood is a door</i>, <small>L.2</small>, <i>leading to the outside. Where the cabinet stood at Right, a fireplace is placed. The tall open hallway</i> <small>R.C.</small> <i>of Act I is blocked up with a flat piece. The doors at Right and Left</i> <small>1</small> <i>have been changed to those of a drawing room. Door at Right leads to</i> <span class="smcap">Helena’s</span> <i>bedroom. Door at Left</i> <small>1</small> <i>leads to library.</i></p>
				<p><i>The furniture consists of a reading table at Left Center covered with magazines. A chair to the Left of table. In front of table is an armchair covered in chintz. A couch Right Center and back of it is a small table with books and book-ends. On this table a small reading lamp. At Right between doorway and fireplace is a small table. There is a work-basket upon it, with pincushion, needles, etc. Down stage at Right and facing the couch is another armchair used by</i> <span class="smcap">Alquist</span>. <i>To the Left of fireplace is a straight-backed chair. Upstage at Left near the</i> <small>L.2</small> <i>door to the outside is a writing desk. There is a lamp upon it, writing paper, etc., a telephone and binoculars.</i></p>
				<p>
					<i>The walls of the room have been covered with silk to the height of seven feet. This is done</i>
					<i>in small flats to fit the different spaces and are in place against the permanent set. The two French windows open into the room. At the rise they are open. There is a balcony beyond looking over the harbor. The same telegraph wires and poles from Act I are again visible through the window. The windows are trimmed with gray lace curtains. Binoculars on desk up stage by television.</i>
				</p>
				<p><i>It is about nine in the morning and SUNLIGHT streams into the room through the open windows.</i> <span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>opens the door</i> <small>L.2</small>; <i>tiptoes in. He carries a potted plant. He beckons the</i> <span class="smcap">Others</span> <i>to follow him, and</i> <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Fabry</span> <i>enter, both carrying a potted plant.</i> <span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>places flowers on the library table and goes to Right and looks toward</i> <span class="smcap">Helena’s</span> <i>bedroom</i> <small>R.</small></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>Putting down his flowers on</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>table and indicates the door</i> <small>R.</small>) Still asleep?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Yes.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Well, as long as she’s asleep she can’t worry about it. (<i>He remains at</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>table.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> She knows nothing about it. (<i>At</i> <small>C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> (<i>Putting plant on writing desk</i>) I certainly hope nothing happens today.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> For goodness sake drop it all. Look, this is a fine cyclamen, isn’t it? A new sort, my latest⁠—Cyclamen Helena.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Picks up binoculars and goes out into balcony</i>) No signs of the ship. Things must be pretty bad.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Be quiet. Suppose she heard you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Coming into room, puts glasses on desk</i>) Well, anyway the <i>Ultimus</i> arrived just in time.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> You really think that today⁠—?</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> I don’t know. (<i>He crosses to</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>table</i>) Aren’t the flowers fine?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>Fondles flowers</i>) These are my primroses. And this is my new jasmine. I’ve discovered a wonderful way of developing flowers quickly. Splendid varieties, too. Next year I’ll be developing marvelous ones.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> What next year?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> I’d give a good deal to know what’s happening at Havre with⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Off</i> <small>R.</small>) Nana.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Keep quiet. She’s awake. Out you go. (<span class="smcap">All</span> <i>go out on tiptoe through</i> <small>L.2</small> <i>door. Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Nana</span> <small>L.1</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Calling from</i> <small>R.</small>) Nana?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> Horrid mess! Pack of heathens. If I had <i>my</i> say, I’d⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Backwards in the doorway from</i> <small>R.</small>) Nana, come and do up my dress.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> I’m coming. So you’re up at last. (<i>Fastening</i> <span class="smcap">Helena’s</span> <i>dress</i>) My gracious, what brutes!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Who? (<i>Turning.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> If you want to turn <i>around</i>, then turn around, but I shan’t fasten you up.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Turns back</i>) What are you grumbling about now?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> These dreadful creatures, these heathens⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Turning toward</i> <span class="smcap">Nana</span> <i>again</i>) The Robots?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> I wouldn’t even call them by name.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What’s happened?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> Another of them here has caught it. He began to smash up the statues and pictures in the drawing room; gnashed his teeth; foamed at the mouth. Worse than an animal.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Which of them caught it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> The one⁠—well, he hasn’t got any <i>Christian</i> name. The one in charge of the library.</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Radius?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> That’s him. My goodness, I’m scared of them. A spider doesn’t scare me as much as them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> But Nana, I’m surprised you’re not sorry for them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> Why, you’re scared of them too. You know you are. Why else did you bring <i>me</i> here?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> I’m not scared, really I’m not, Nana. I’m only sorry for them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> You’re scared. Nobody could <i>help</i> being scared. Why, the dog’s scared of them. He won’t take a scrap of meat out of their hands. He draws in his tail and howls when he knows they’re about.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> The dog has no sense.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> He’s better than <i>them</i>, and he knows it. Even the <i>horse</i> shies when he meets them. They don’t have any young, and a <i>dog</i> has young, <i>everyone</i> has young⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Turning back</i>) Please fasten up my dress, Nana.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> I say it’s against God’s will to⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What is it that smells so nice?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> Flowers.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What for?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> Now you can turn around.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Turns; crosses to</i> <small>C.</small>) Oh, aren’t they lovely? Look, Nana. What’s happening today?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> It ought to be the end of the world. (<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Domin</span> <small>L.2</small>. <i>He crosses down front of table</i> <small>L.C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Crosses to him</i>) Oh, hello, Harry. (<span class="smcap">Nana</span> <i>turns upstage to</i> <small>L.</small>) Harry, why all these flowers?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Guess. (<i>This scene is played down in front of</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>table.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Well, it’s not my <i>birthday</i>!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Better than that.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> I don’t know. Tell me.</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> It’s ten years ago <i>today</i> since you <i>came</i> here.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Ten years? Today? Why⁠—(<i>They embrace.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> (<i>Muttering</i>) I’m off. (<i>She exits</i> <small>L.1</small>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Fancy you remembering.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> I’m really ashamed, Helena. I didn’t.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> But you⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> <i>They</i> remembered.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Who?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Busman, Hallemeier⁠—<i>all</i> of them. Put your hand in my pocket.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Takes necklace from his Left jacket pocket</i>) Oh! Pearls! A necklace! Harry, is this for me?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> It’s from Busman.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> But we can’t accept it, can we?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Oh, yes, we can. (<i>Puts necklace on table</i> <small>L.C.</small>) Put your hand in the other pocket.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Takes a revolver out of his Right pocket</i>) What’s that?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Sorry. Not that. Try again. (<i>He puts gun in pocket.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Oh, Harry, why do you carry a revolver?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> It got there by mistake.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> You never used to <i>carry</i> one.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> No, you’re right. (<i>Indicates breast pocket</i>) There, that’s the pocket.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Takes out cameo</i>) A cameo. Why, it’s a Greek cameo.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Apparently. Anyhow, Fabry says it is.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Fabry? Did Mr. Fabry give me that?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Of course. (<i>Opens the</i> <small>L.1</small> <i>door</i>) And look in here. Helena, come and see this. (<span class="smcap">Both</span> <i>exit</i> <small>L.1</small>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Off</i> <small>L.1</small>) Oh, isn’t it fine? Is this from you?</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Off</i> <small>L.1</small>) No, from Alquist. And there’s another on the piano.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> This must be from you?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> There’s a card on it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> From Doctor Gall. (<i>Reappearing in</i> <small>L.1</small> <i>doorway</i>) Oh, Harry, I feel embarrassed at so much kindness.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Enters to up</i> <small>R.</small> <i>of table</i> <small>L.C.</small>) Come here. This is what Hallemeier brought you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>To up</i> <small>L.</small> <i>of desk</i>) These beautiful flowers?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Yes. It’s a new kind. Cyclamen-Helena. He grew them in honor of <i>you</i>. They are almost as beautiful as you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Kissing him</i>) Harry, why do they all⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> They’re awfully fond of you. I’m afraid that my present is a little⁠—Look out of the window. (<i>Crosses to window and beckons to her.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Where? (<i>They go out into the balcony.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Into the harbor.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> There’s a new ship.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> That’s <i>your</i> ship.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Mine? How do you mean?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<small>R.</small>) For you to take trips in⁠—for your amusement.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<small>L.</small>) Harry, that’s a gunboat.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> A gunboat? What are you thinking of? It’s only a little <i>bigger</i> and more <i>solid</i> than most ships.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Yes, but with guns.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Oh, yes, with a few guns. You’ll travel like a <i>queen</i>, Helena.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What’s the meaning of it? Has anything happened?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Good heavens, no. I say, try these pearls. (<i>Crosses to</i> <small>R.</small> <i>of table</i> <small>L.C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Harry, have you had bad news?</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> On the contrary, no letters have arrived for a whole week.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Nor telegrams? (<i>Coming into the room</i> <small>C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Nor telegrams.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What does that mean?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> <i>Holidays</i> for us! We all sit in the office with our feet on the table and take a nap. No letters⁠—no telegrams. Glorious!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Then you’ll stay with me today?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Certainly. (<i>Embraces her</i>) That is, we will see. Do you remember ten years ago today? (<i>Crosses to</i> <small>L.</small> <i>of table</i> <small>L.C.</small>) Miss Glory, it’s a great honor to welcome you. (<i>They assume the same positions as when they first met ten years before in</i> <span class="smcap">Domin’s</span> <i>office.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>To table</i>) Oh, Mr. Manager, I’m so interested in your factory. (<i>She sits</i> <small>R.</small> <i>of table.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> I’m sorry, Miss Glory, it’s strictly forbidden. The manufacture of artificial people is a secret.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> But to oblige the young lady who has come a long way.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Leans on table</i>) Certainly, Miss Glory. I have no secrets from you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Are you sure, Harry? (<i>Leaning on desk, seriously, his right hand on hers.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> <i>Yes.</i> (<i>They gradually draw apart.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> But I warn you, sir, this young lady intends to do terrible things.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Good gracious, Miss Glory. Perhaps she doesn’t want to marry me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Heaven forbid. She never dreamt of such a thing. But she came here intending to stir up a <i>revolt</i> among your <i>Robots</i>.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> A revolt of the Robots!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Low voice</i>) Harry, what’s the matter with you?</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Laughing it off</i>) <i>A revolt of the Robots</i>, that’s a fine idea. (<i>Crosses to back of table. She watches him suspiciously.</i>) Miss Glory, it would be easier for you to cause bolts and screws to rebel than our Robots. You know, Helena, you’re wonderful. You’ve turned the hearts of us all. (<i>Sits on table.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Oh, I was fearfully impressed by you all then. You were all so sure of yourselves, so strong. I seemed like a tiny little girl who had lost her way among⁠—among⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> What?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Front</i>) Among huge trees. All my feelings were so <i>trifling</i> compared with your <i>self-confidence</i>. And in all these years I’ve never <i>lost</i> this anxiety. But you’ve never felt the <i>least</i> misgiving, not even when everything went wrong.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> What went wrong?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Your plans. You remember, Harry, when the workmen in America revolted against the Robots and smashed them up, and when the people gave the Robots firearms against the rebels. And then when the governments turned the Robots into soldiers, and there were so many <i>wars</i>.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Getting up and walking about</i>) We foresaw that, Helena. (<i>Around table to</i> <small>R.C.</small>) You see, these are only passing troubles which are bound to happen before the new conditions are <i>established</i>. (<i>Walking up and down, standing at Center.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> You were all so powerful, so overwhelming. The <i>whole world</i> bowed down before you. (<i>Rising</i>) Oh, Harry! (<i>Crosses to him.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> What is it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Close the factory and let’s go away. All of us.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> I say, what’s the meaning of this?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> I don’t know. But can’t we go away?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Impossible, Helena! That is, at this particular moment⁠—</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> At once, Harry. I’m so frightened.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Takes her</i>) About what, Helena?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> It’s as if something was falling on top of us, and couldn’t be stopped. Oh, take us all away from here. We’ll find a place in the world where there’s no one else. Alquist will build us a house, and then we’ll begin life all over again. (<i>The TELEPHONE rings.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Crosses to telephone on desk up</i> <small>L.</small>) Excuse me. Hello⁠—yes, what? I’ll be there at once. Fabry is calling me, my dear. (<i>Crosses</i> <small>L.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Tell me⁠—(<i>She rushes up to him.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Yes, when I come back. Don’t go out of the house, dear. (<i>Exits</i> <small>L.2</small>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> He won’t tell me. (<span class="smcap">Nana</span> <i>brings in a water carafe from</i> <small>L.1</small>.) Nana, find me the latest newspapers. Quickly. Look in Mr. Domin’s bedroom.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> All right. (<i>Crosses</i> <small>R.</small>) He leaves them all over the place. That’s how they get crumpled up. (<i>Continues muttering. Exits</i> <small>R.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Looking through binoculars at the harbor</i>) That’s a warship. U-l-t-i⁠—<i>Ultimus</i>. They’re loading.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> (<i>Enters</i> <small>R.</small> <i>with newspapers</i>) Here they are. See how they’re crumpled up.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Crosses down</i>) They’re old ones. A week old. (<i>Drops papers.</i> <span class="smcap">Both</span> <i>at front of couch</i>. <span class="smcap">Nana</span> <i>sits</i> <small>R.</small> <i>of table</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>Puts on spectacles. Reads the newspapers.</i>) Something’s happening, Nana.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> Very likely. It always does. (<i>Spelling out the words</i>) “W-a-r in B-a-l-k-a-n-s.” Is that far off?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Oh, don’t read it. It’s always the same. Always wars! (<i>Sits on couch.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> What else do you <i>expect</i>? Why do you <i>keep</i> selling thousands and thousands of these heathens as soldiers?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> I suppose it can’t be helped, Nana. We can’t know⁠—Domin can’t know what they’re to be used for. When an order comes for them he must just send them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> He shouldn’t make them. (<i>Reading from newspaper</i>) “The Robot soldiers spare no-body in the occ-up-ied terr-it-ory. They have ass-ass-ass-inat-ed ov-er sev-en hundred thous-and cit-iz-ens.” Citizens, if you please.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Rises and crosses and takes paper</i>) It can’t be. Let me see. (<i>Crossing to</i> <span class="smcap">Nana</span>) They have assassinated over seven hundred thousand citizens, evidently at the order of their commander. (<i>Drops paper; crosses up</i> <small>C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> (<i>Spelling out the words from other paper she has picked up from the floor</i>) “Re-bell-ion in Ma-drid a-gainst the gov-ern-ment. Rob-ot in-fant-ry fires on the crowd. Nine thou-sand killed and wounded.”</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Oh, stop! (<i>Goes up and looks toward the harbor.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> Here’s something printed in big letters. “Latest news. At Havre the first org-an-iz-a-tion of Rob-ots has been e-stab-lished. Rob-ots work-men, sail-ors and sold-iers have iss-ued a man-i-fest-o to all Rob-ots through-out the world.” I don’t understand that. That’s got no sense. Oh, good gracious, another murder.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Up</i> <small>C.</small>) Take those papers away now.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> Wait a bit. Here’s something in still bigger type. “Stat-ist-ics of pop-ul-a-tion.” What’s that?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Coming down to</i> <span class="smcap">Nana</span>) Let me see. (<i>Reads</i>) “During the past week there has again not been a single birth recorded.”</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> What’s the meaning of that? (<i>Drops paper.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Nana, no more <i>people</i> are being born.</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> That’s the end, then? (<i>Removing spectacles</i>) We’re done for.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Don’t talk like that.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> No more people are being born. That’s a punishment, that’s a punishment.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Nana!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> (<i>Standing up</i>) That’s the end of the world. (<i>Repeat until off. Picks paper up from floor. She exits</i> <small>L.1</small>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Goes up to window</i>) Oh, Mr. Alquist. (<span class="smcap">Alquist</span> <i>off</i> <small>L.2</small>.) Will you come here? Oh, come just as you are. You look very nice in your mason’s overalls. (<span class="smcap">Alquist</span> <i>enters</i> <small>L.2</small>, <i>his hands soiled with lime and brick dust. She goes to end of sofa and meets him</i> <small>C.</small>) Dear Mr. Alquist, it was awfully kind of you, that lovely present.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> My hands are soiled. I’ve been <i>experimenting</i> with that new cement.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Never mind. Please sit down. (<i>Sits on couch. He sits on her</i> <small>L.</small>) Mr. Alquist, what’s the meaning of <i>Ultimus</i>?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> The last. Why?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> That’s the name of my new ship. Have you seen it? Do you think we’re off soon⁠—on a trip?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Perhaps <i>very</i> soon.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> All of you with me?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> I should like us <i>all</i> to be there.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What <i>is</i> the matter?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Things are just moving on.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Dear Mr. Alquist, I know something dreadful has happened.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Has your husband <i>told</i> you anything?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> No. <i>Nobody</i> will tell me anything. But I feel⁠—Is anything the matter?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Not that we’ve heard of yet.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> I feel so nervous. Don’t <i>you</i> ever feel nervous?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Well, I’m an old man, you know. I’ve got old-fashioned ways. And I’m afraid of all this progress, and these new-fangled ideas.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Like Nana?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Yes, like Nana. Has Nana got a prayer book?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Yes, a big thick one.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> And has it got prayers for various occasions? Against thunderstorms? Against illness? But not against <i>progress</i>?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> I don’t think so.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> That’s a pity.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Why, do you mean you’d like to pray?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> I <i>do</i> pray.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> How?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Something like this: “Oh, Lord, I thank thee for having given me toil; enlighten Domin and all those who are astray; destroy their work, and aid mankind to return to their labors; let them not suffer harm in soul or body; deliver us from the Robots, and protect Helena. Amen.”</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Touches his arm; pats it</i>) Mr. Alquist, are you a believer?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> I don’t know. I’m not quite sure.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> And yet you pray?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> That’s better than <i>worrying</i> about it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> And that’s enough for you?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> (<i>Ironically</i>) It <i>has</i> to be.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> But if you thought you saw the destruction of mankind coming upon us⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> I <i>do</i> see it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> You mean mankind will be destroyed?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> It’s bound to be unless⁠—unless.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Nothing. (<i>Pats her shoulder. Rises</i>) Goodbye. (<i>Exits</i> <small>L.2</small>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Rises. Calling</i>) Nana, Nana! (<span class="smcap">Nana</span> <i>enters</i> <small>L.1</small>.) Is Radius still there?</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> (<small>L.C.</small>) The one who went mad? They haven’t come for him yet.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Is he still raving?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> No. He’s tied up.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Please bring him here.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> What?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> At once, Nana. (<i>Exits</i> <span class="smcap">Nana</span> <small>L.1</small>. <span class="smcap">Helena</span> <i>to telephone</i>) Hello, Doctor Gall, please. Oh, good day, Doctor. Yes, it’s Helena. Thanks for your lovely present. Could you come and see me right away? It’s important. Thank you. (<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Radius</span> <small>L.1</small>; <i>looks at</i> <span class="smcap">Helena</span>, <i>then turns head up</i> <small>L.</small> <i>She crosses to him</i>, <small>L.C.</small>) Poor Radius, you’ve caught it too? Now they’ll send you to the stamping mill. Couldn’t you control yourself? Why did it happen? You see, Radius, you are more intelligent than the rest. Doctor Gall took such trouble to make you different. Won’t you speak?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> (<i>Looking at her</i>) Send me to the stamping mill. (<i>Open and close fists.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> But I don’t want them to kill you. What was the trouble, Radius?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> (<i>Two steps toward her. Opens and closes fists</i>) I won’t work for you. Put me into the stamping mill.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Do you hate us? Why?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> You are not as strong as the Robots. You are not as skillful as the Robots. The Robots can do everything. You only give orders. You do nothing but talk.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> But someone must give orders.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> I don’t want a master. I know everything for myself.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Radius! Doctor Gall gave you a better brain than the rest, better than ours. You are the only one of the Robots that understands perfectly. That’s why I had you put into the library, so that you could read everything, understand everything, and then, oh, Radius⁠—I wanted you to show the whole world that the Robots are our equals. That’s what I wanted of you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> I don’t want a master. I want to be master over others.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> I’m sure they’d put you in charge of <i>many</i> Robots. You would be a <i>teacher</i> of the Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> I want to be master over people. (<i>Head up. Pride.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Staggering</i>) You are mad.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> (<i>Head down low, crosses toward</i> <small>L.</small>; <i>opens hands</i>) Then send me to the stamping mill.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Steps to him</i>) Do you think we’re afraid of you? (<i>Rushing to desk and writing note.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> (<i>Turns his head uneasily</i>) What are you going to do? What are you going to do? (<i>Starts for her.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Crosses to</i> <small>R.</small> <i>of him</i>) Radius! (<i>He cowers. Body sways.</i>) Give this note to Mr. Domin. (<i>He faces her.</i>) It asks them not to send you to the stamping mill. I’m sorry you hate us so.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> (<i>Enters</i> <small>L.2</small>; <i>goes to</i> <small>C.</small> <i>upstage</i>) You wanted me?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Backs away</i>) It’s about Radius, Doctor. He had an attack this morning. He smashed the statues downstairs.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> (<i>Looks at him</i>) What a pity to <i>lose</i> him. (<i>At</i> <small>C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Radius isn’t going to be put into the stamping mill. (<i>Stands to the</i> <small>R.</small> <i>of</i> <span class="smcap">Gall</span>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> But every Robot after he has had an attack⁠—it’s a strict order.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> No matter⁠—Radius isn’t going, if I can <i>prevent</i> it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> But I warn you. It’s dangerous. Come here to the window, my good fellow. Let’s have a look. Please give me a needle or a pin. (<i>Crosses up</i> <small>R.</small> <span class="smcap">Radius</span> <i>follows</i>. <span class="smcap">Helena</span> <i>gets a needle from work-basket on table</i> <small>R.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What for?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> A test. (<span class="smcap">Helena</span> <i>gives him the needle</i>. <span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>crosses up to</i> <span class="smcap">Radius</span>, <i>who faces him. Sticks it into his hand and</i> <span class="smcap">Radius</span> <i>gives a violent start.</i>) <i>Gently, gently.</i> (<i>Opens the jacket of</i> <span class="smcap">Radius</span> <i>and puts his ear to his heart</i>) Radius, you are going into the stamping mill, do you understand? There they’ll kill you⁠—(<i>Takes glasses off and cleans them</i>)⁠—and grind you to powder. (<span class="smcap">Radius</span> <i>opens hands and fingers.</i>) That’s terribly painful. It will make you scream aloud. (<i>Opens</i> <span class="smcap">Radius’s</span> <i>eye</i>. <span class="smcap">Radius</span> <i>trembles.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Doctor⁠—(<i>Standing near couch.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> No, no, Radius, I was wrong. I forgot that Madame Domin has put in a good word for you, and you’ll be left off. (<i>Listens to heart</i>) Ah, that <i>does</i> make a difference. (<span class="smcap">Radius</span> <i>relaxes. Again listens to his heart for a reaction</i>) All right⁠—you can go.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> You do unnecessary things⁠—(<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Radius</span> <small>L.2</small>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> (<i>Speaks to her⁠—very concerned</i>) Reaction of the pupils, increase of sensitiveness. It wasn’t an attack characteristic of the Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What was it, then? (<i>Sits in couch.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> (<small>C.</small>) Heaven knows. Stubbornness, anger or revolt⁠—I don’t know. And his heart, too.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> It was fluttering with nervousness like a <i>human</i> heart. He was all in a sweat with fear, and⁠—do you know, I don’t believe the rascal is a Robot <i>at all</i> any longer.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Doctor, has Radius a soul?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> (<i>Over to couch</i>) He’s got something nasty.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> If you knew how he hates us. Oh, Doctor, are all your Robots like that? All the new ones that you began to make in a different way? (<i>She invites him to sit beside her. He sits.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Well, some are more sensitive than others. They’re all more human beings than Rossum’s Robots were.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Perhaps this hatred is more like human beings, too?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> That too is <i>progress</i>.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What became of the girl you made, the one who was most like us?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Your favorite? I <i>kept</i> her. She’s lovely, but stupid. No good for work.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> But she’s so beautiful.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> I called her “Helena.” I wanted her to resemble <i>you</i>. She is a failure.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> In what way?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> She goes about as if in a dream, remote and listless. She’s without life. I watch and wait for a miracle to happen. Sometimes I think to myself: “If you were to wake up only for a moment you would <i>kill</i> me for having <i>made</i> you.”</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> And yet you go <i>on</i> making Robots! Why are no more children being born?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> We don’t know.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Oh, but you must. Tell me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> You see, so many Robots are being manufactured that people are becoming superfluous. Man is really a survival, but that he should die out, after a paltry thirty years of competition, that’s the awful part of it. You might almost think that Nature was <i>offended</i> at the manufacture of the Robots, but we still have old Rossum’s manuscript.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Yes. In that strong box.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> We go on using it and making Robots. All the universities are sending in long petitions to restrict their production. Otherwise, they say, mankind will become extinct through lack of fertility. But the R. U. R. shareholders, of course, won’t hear of it. All the governments, on the other hand, are clamoring for an increase in production, to raise the standards of their armies. And all the manufacturers in the world are ordering Robots like mad.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> And has no one demanded that the manufacture should cease altogether?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> No one has courage.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Courage!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> People would stone him to death. You see, after all, it’s more convenient to get your work done by the Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Oh, Doctor, what’s going to become of people?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> God knows. Madame Helena, it looks to us scientists like the end.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>She looks out front. Rising</i>) Thank you for coming and telling me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> (<i>Rises</i>) That means that you’re sending me away.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Yes. (<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Dr. Gall</span> <small>L.2</small>. <i>She crosses to</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>To door</i> <small>L.1</small>. <i>With sudden resolution</i>) Nana! Nana! the fire, light it quickly. (<span class="smcap">Helena</span> <i>exits</i> <small>R.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> (<i>Entering</i> <small>L.1</small>) What, light the fire in the summer?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Off</i> <small>R.</small>) Yes!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> (<i>She looks for</i> <span class="smcap">Radius</span>) Has that mad <i>Radius</i> gone?⁠—A fire in summer, what an idea? Nobody would think she’d been <i>married</i> ten years. She’s like a baby, no sense at all. A fire in summer. Like a baby. (<i>She lights the fire.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Returns from</i> <small>R.</small> <i>with armful of faded papers. Back of couch to fireplace</i>, <small>L.</small> <i>of</i> <span class="smcap">Nana</span>) Is it burning, Nana? All this has got to be burned.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> What’s that?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Old papers, fearfully old. Nana, shall I burn them?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> Are they any use?</p>
			<p/>
			<p>
				<span class="smcap">Helena.</span>
				<i>No.</i>
			</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> Well, then, burn them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Throwing the first sheet on the fire</i>) What would you say, Nana, if this was money and a lot of money? And if it was an invention, the greatest invention in the world?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> (<small>R.</small> <i>of fireplace</i>) I’d say burn it. All these new-fangled things are an offense to the Lord. It’s downright wickedness. Wanting to improve the world after He has made it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Look how they curl up. As if they were alive. Oh, Nana, how horrible!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> Here, let me burn them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Drawing back</i>) No, no, I must do it myself. Just look at the flames. They are like hands, like tongues, like living shapes. (<i>Raking fire with the poker</i>) Lie down, lie down.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> That’s the end of them. (<i>Fireplace slowly out.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Nana, Nana!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> Good gracious, what is it you’ve burned? (<i>Almost to herself.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Whatever have I done?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> Well, what is it? (<span class="smcap">Men’s</span> <i>laughter off</i> <small>L.2</small>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Go quickly. It’s the gentlemen calling.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Nana.</span> Good gracious, what a place! (<i>Exits</i> <small>L.1</small>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Opens door</i> <small>L.2</small>) Come along and offer your congratulations. (<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Dr. Gall</span>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>Crosses to</i> <small>R.C.</small>) Madame Helena, I congratulate you on this festive day.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Thank you. (<i>Coming to</i> <small>C.</small>) Where are Fabry and Busman?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> They’ve gone down the harbor. (<i>Closes the door and comes to</i> <small>C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Friends, we must <i>drink</i> to this happy occasion.</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Crosses</i> <small>L.</small>) Brandy? With soda water? (<i>Exits</i> <small>L.1</small>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Let’s be temperate. No soda.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> What’s been burning here? Well, shall I tell her about it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> (<small>L.C.</small>) Of course. It’s all over now.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>Crosses to</i> <span class="smcap">Domin</span>. <i>Embracing</i> <span class="smcap">Domin</span>) It’s all over now. It’s all over now. (<i>They dance around</i> <span class="smcap">Dr. Gall</span> <i>in a circle.</i>) It’s all over now.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>In unison</i>) It’s all over now. (<i>They keep repeating. Keep it after</i> <span class="smcap">Helena</span> <i>is on.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Entering</i> <small>L.1</small> <i>with decanter and glasses</i>) What’s all over now? What’s the matter with you all? (<i>She puts tray on</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>table.</i> <span class="smcap">Dr. Gall</span> <i>helps her to pour the drinks.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>Crosses to back of table</i>) A piece of good luck. Madame Domin! (<span class="smcap">All</span> <i>ad lib.</i>) Just ten years ago today you arrived on this island. (<span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>crosses to table for drink.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> And now, ten years later to the minute⁠—(<i>Crosses to</i> <small>L.</small> <i>of</i> <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> The same ship’s returning to us. So here’s to luck. (<i>Drinks.</i> <span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>with great exuberance has gone out in the balcony and looks over the harbor.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Madame, your health. (<span class="smcap">All</span> <i>drink.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> That’s fine and strong.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Which ship did you mean?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Crosses down to</i> <small>C.</small> <span class="smcap">Helena</span> <i>gives him his drink and she crosses to front of couch</i>) Any ship will do, as long as it arrives in time. To the ship. (<i>Empties his glass.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> You’ve been waiting for the ship? (<i>Sits on couch.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Rather. Like Robinson Crusoe. Madame Helena, best wishes. Come along, Domin, out with the news. (<span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>has sat</i> <small>L.</small> <i>of</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>table, drinking</i>. <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>back of table</i> <small>R.C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Do tell me what’s happened?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> First, it’s all up. (<i>He puts brandy glass on</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>table</i>. <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>sits on table, upper end.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What’s up?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> The revolt.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What revolt?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Give me that paper, Hallemeier. (<span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>hands paper</i>. <span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>reads</i>) “The first National Robot organization has been founded at Havre, and has issued an appeal to the Robots throughout the world.”</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> I read that.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> That means a revolution. A revolution of all the Robots in the world.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> By Jove, I’d like to know⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<small>C.</small>) Who started it? So would I. There was nobody in the world who could affect the Robots, no agitator, no one, and suddenly this happens, if you please.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What did they do?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> They got possession of all firearms, telegraphs, radio stations, railways and ships.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> And don’t forget that these rascals outnumbered us by at least a thousand to one. A hundredth <i>part</i> of them would be enough to <i>settle</i> us.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Remember that this news was brought by the last steamer. That explains the stoppage of all communication, and the arrival of no more ships. We knocked off work a few days ago, and we’re just waiting to see when things are to start <i>afresh</i>.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Is that why you gave me a warship? (<span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>fills</i> <span class="smcap">Domin’s</span> <i>glass.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Oh, no, my dear, I ordered that six months ago. Just to be sure I was on the safe side. But, upon my soul, I was sure then that we’d be on board today.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Why six months ago?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Well, there were <i>signs</i>, you know. But that’s of no consequence. (<i>Gets glass</i>) To think that this week the whole of civilization has been at <i>stake</i>. Your health, my friends.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Your health, Madame Helena. (<span class="smcap">All</span> <i>drink to</i> <span class="smcap">Helena</span>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> You say it’s all over?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Absolutely.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> How do you know?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> The boat’s coming in. The regular mail boat, exact to the minute by the timetable. It will dock punctually at eleven-thirty.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Punctuality is a fine thing, my friends. That’s what keeps the world in order. Here’s to punctuality. (<span class="smcap">Men</span> <i>drink.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Then⁠—everything⁠—is all right?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Up</i> <small>C.</small> <i>a step</i>) Practically everything. I believe they’ve cut the cables and seized the radio station. But it doesn’t matter if only the <i>timetable</i> holds good. (<i>Up to window.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>Rises</i>) If the <i>timetable</i> holds good, human laws hold good. Divine laws hold good, the laws of the <i>universe</i> hold good, everything holds good that <i>ought</i> to hold good. (<span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>applauds.</i>) The timetable is more significant than the gospel, more than Homer, more than the whole of <i>Kant</i>. Madame Helena, the timetable is the most perfect product of the human mind. Madame Helena, I’ll fill up my glass. (<span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>hands</i> <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>the decanter.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Why didn’t you tell me anything about it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Heaven forbid.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> You mustn’t be worried with such things. (<i>Glass on table</i> <small>R.C.</small>; <i>crosses to back of couch.</i>)</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> But if the revolution had spread as far as here?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> You wouldn’t know anything about it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Why?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Because we’d be on board your <i>Ultimus</i> and well out at sea. Within a month, Helena, we’d be dictating our own terms to the Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> I don’t understand.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Crosses to</i> <small>C.</small> <i>toward</i> <span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span>) We’d take something with us that the Robots could not exist <i>without</i>!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What, Harry?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Turns to</i> <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span>) The secret of their manufacture. Old Rossum’s manuscript. As soon as they found out that they couldn’t <i>make</i> themselves they’d be on their knees to us.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> (<i>Rises</i>) Madame Domin, that was our trump card. I never had the least fear the Robots would win. How could they against people like us? (<i>Up to window.</i> <span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>rises and goes out into the balcony.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Why didn’t you tell me? (<i>She rushes up to the fireplace and sees the ashes.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Why, the boat’s in!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Eleven-thirty to the dot. (<i>Rising and going onto the balcony</i>) The <i>good old Amelia</i> that brought Madame Helena to us. (<span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>goes out onto the balcony.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Just ten years ago to the minute.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> They’re throwing out the mailbags.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Busman’s waiting for them. And Fabry will bring us the first news. You know, Helena, I’m fearfully curious to know how they⁠—(<i>Crosses to</i> <small>C.</small> <i>She gets away from fire to</i> <small>L.</small> <i>of couch</i>)⁠—tackled this business in Europe.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>Crosses down to table</i>) To think we weren’t in it, we who invented the Robots! (<i>Returning to the armchair.</i>)</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Harry⁠—(<i>Rushing to</i> <span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>from fireplace.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> What is it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Let’s leave here.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Now, Helena? Oh, come, come.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> As quickly as possible, all of us!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Why?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Please, Harry. Please, Doctor Gall, Hallemeier, please close the factory.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Why, none of us could leave here now.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Why?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Because we’re about to <i>extend</i> the manufacture of the Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What, now, now after the revolt?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Yes, precisely, after the revolt. We’re just beginning the manufacture of a new kind.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What kind?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Henceforward we shan’t have just one factory. There won’t be <i>Universal</i> Robots any more. We’ll establish a factory in every country, in every state, and do you know what these new factories will make?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> No, what?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> <i>National</i> Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> How do you mean?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> I mean that each of these factories will produce Robots of a different color, a different language. They’ll be complete strangers to each other. (<i>Turns; takes in</i> <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Gall</span>) They’ll never be able to understand each other. Then we’ll egg them on a little in the matter of misunderstanding and the result will be that for ages to come every Robot will hate every other Robot of a different factory mark. <i>So humanity will be safe.</i></p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>To each of them</i>) By Jove, we’ll make Negro Robots and Swedish Robots and Czechoslovakian Robots, and then⁠—</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Harry, that’s dreadful.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Madame Domin, here’s to the hundred new factories. The <i>National</i> Robots. (<span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>back of table</i> <small>L.C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Helena, mankind can only keep things going for another hundred years at the outside. For a hundred years man <i>must</i> be allowed to develop and achieve the most he can.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Oh, <i>close</i> the factory before it’s too late.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> I tell you we are just beginning on a bigger scale than ever. (<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Fabry</span> <small>L.2</small>; <i>goes to</i> <small>L.</small> <i>of</i> <span class="smcap">Domin</span>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Well, Fabry?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> What’s happened? Have you been down to the boat?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Let’s hear.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Read that, Domin. (<i>He hands him a pink handbill. When</i> <span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>receives the handbill he sees at once that something has happened.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Tell us, Fabry.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> (<i>Falsely</i>) Well, everything is all right⁠—comparatively. (<i>To the other</i> <span class="smcap">Men</span>) On the whole, much as we expected.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> They acquitted themselves splendidly.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Who?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> The <i>people</i>.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> (<i>Hesitating</i>) Oh, yes, of course. That is⁠—Excuse me, there is something we ought to discuss alone.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Touches his arm</i>) Fabry, have you had bad news?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> No, no, on the contrary. I only think that we better go into the office.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Stay here. I’ll go. (<i>Exits</i> <small>L.1</small>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> What’s happened?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Damnation! (<i>Coming down to</i> <small>R.C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Bear in mind that the <i>Amelia</i> brought whole bales of these leaflets. No other cargo at all. (<span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>closes the door</i> <small>L.2</small>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> What? But it arrived on the minute.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> The Robots are great on punctuality. <i>Read it</i>, Domin.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<small>R.C.</small> <i>Reads handbill</i>) “Robots throughout the world. We, the first International organization of Rossum’s Universal Robots, proclaim man our enemy, and an outlaw in the universe.” Good heavens, who <i>taught</i> them these phrases?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Go on.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> They say they are more highly developed than man; stronger and more intelligent. The man’s their parasite. Why, it’s absurd.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Read the third paragraph.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> “Robots throughout the world, we command you to kill all mankind. Spare no man. Spare no woman. Save factories, railways, machinery, mines and raw materials. Destroy the rest. Then return to work. Work must not be stopped.” (<i>Looks at</i> <span class="smcap">Others</span>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> That’s ghastly.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> The devil!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> “These orders are to be carried out as soon as received.” Then come the detailed instructions. Is this actually being <i>done</i>, Fabry?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Evidently. (<span class="smcap">Busman</span> <i>rushes in</i> <small>L.2</small> <i>and collapses on couch</i> <small>R.C.</small>) By Jove, that was a sprint!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Well, boys, I suppose you’ve heard the glad news.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Quick on board the <i>Ultimus</i>.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Wait, Harry, wait. There’s no hurry.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Why wait?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Because it’s no good, my boy. The Robots are already on board the <i>Ultimus</i>.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> That’s ugly.</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Fabry, telephone the electrical works. (<span class="smcap">Fabry</span> <i>goes to back of couch.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> No use, my boy. They’ve charged the air with static.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Inspects his revolver</i>) Well, then, I’ll <i>go</i>. (<i>Starts</i> <small>L.</small>; <i>stops.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Where?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> To the electrical works. There are some <i>people</i> still there. I’ll bring them across. (<i>Gets as far as</i> <small>L.2</small> <i>door.</i>)</p>
			<p class="right">(<i>WARN Curtain.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Better not try it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Why?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Because I’m very much afraid we are surrounded. (<span class="smcap">All</span> <i>rush out into the balcony.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Surrounded? (<i>Runs to window</i>) I rather think you’re right. (<span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>rushes to balcony.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> By Jove, that’s deuced quick work. (<i>Going to windows.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Runs in</i> <small>L.1</small>. <i>To</i> <small>L.</small>) Harry, what’s this? (<i>Holds out paper.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Where did you get it? (<i>Coming to</i> <small>C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Points to the manifesto of the</i> <span class="smcap">Robots</span> <i>which she has in her hand</i>) The Robots in the kitchen!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Where are the ones that brought it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> There, gathered around the house. (<span class="smcap">Gall</span>, <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span>, <span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>start down</i> <small>C.</small>)</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p class="center">(<i>The factory WHISTLE blows.</i> <span class="smcap">Mob</span> <i>VOICES start.</i>)</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> The factory whistle! (<span class="smcap">Fabry</span>, <span class="smcap">Gall</span>, <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>looking over</i> <small>C.</small>; <i>then turn</i> <small>R.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Noon?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Looking at his watch. To</i> <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span>) No! That’s not noon yet. That must be⁠—that’s⁠—(<i>Front.</i>)</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> What?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> The Robots’ signal⁠—the attack!</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>(<span class="smcap">Helena</span> <i>clings to</i> <span class="smcap">Domin</span>. <span class="smcap">Fabry</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>close the steel shutters on window</i> <small>C.</small> <span class="smcap">Busman</span> <i>hurries to window and looks through the shutters. The Curtain falls quickly with</i> <span class="smcap">Helena</span> <i>in</i> <span class="smcap">Domin’s</span> <i>arms. The WHISTLE blows until the Curtain is down.</i>)</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="center">CURTAIN</p>
			<hr class="chap"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
