<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>ACT THREE</h2>
			<blockquote>
				<p><span class="smcap">Scene</span>: <span class="smcap">Helena’s</span> <i>drawing-room as before. The room is dark and gray. The steel shutters which are outside are still closed as at the end of Act II.</i> <span class="smcap">Alquist</span> <i>is sitting in chair down stage at extreme</i> <small>R.</small> <span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>comes into the room</i>, <small>L.2</small>. (<i>Subdued voices.</i>) <span class="smcap">Dr. Gall</span> <i>is looking out of the window at Center. He is seated in a chair.</i></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Gets binoculars from desk; crosses up to window. To</i> <span class="smcap">Gall</span>) Any more of them?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Yes. There standing like a wall, beyond the garden railing. Why are they so quiet? It’s monstrous to be besieged with silence.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Looking through the barred windows</i>) I should like to know what they are waiting for? They must make a start any minute now. If they lean against the railings it will snap like a match.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> They aren’t armed.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Puzzled</i>) We couldn’t hold our own for five minutes. Man alive, they overwhelm us like an avalanche. Why don’t they make a rush for it? I say. (<i>Turns to</i> <span class="smcap">Gall</span>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Well?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> I’d like to know what will become of us in the next ten minutes. They’ve got us in a vise. We’re done for, Gall.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> You know, we made one serious mistake.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> What?</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> We made the Robots’ faces too much alike. A hundred thousand faces all alike, all facing this way. A hundred thousand expressionless bubbles. It’s like a nightmare.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> You think if they’d been different⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> It wouldn’t have been such an awful sight!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Looks through binoculars towards the harbor</i>) I’d like to know what they’re unloading from the <i>Amelia</i>.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Not firearms.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> (<i>Enters</i> <small>L.2</small> <i>with a plug-box to which is attached a long cable or wire</i>. <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>following him</i>. <span class="smcap">Fabry</span> <i>attaches the cable to an electric installation which is on the floor near the wall, down stage at</i> <small>L.1</small> <i>entrance</i>) All right, Hallemeier, lay down that wire.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>Just inside the room</i>) That was a bit of work. What’s the news? (<i>Seeing</i> <span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>at the window.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> We’re completely surrounded.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>Crosses to window</i>) We’ve barricaded the passages and the stairs. (<i>Going to window</i>) God, what swarms of them. I don’t like the looks of them, Domin. There’s a feeling of death about it all. Any water here?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Ready!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> (<i>Turning round in the chair</i>) What’s that wire for, Fabry?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> The electrical installation. Now we can run the current all along the garden railing. (<i>Up to window</i>) Whenever we like. If anyone touches it he’ll know it. We’ve still got some <i>people</i> there anyhow.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Where?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> In the electrical works. At least, I hope so. (<i>Goes to lamp on table</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>and turns on lamp</i>) Ah, they’re there, and they’re working. As long as that’ll burn we’re all right. (<i>To window.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> The barricades are <i>all right</i>, too, Fabry.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> <i>Your</i> barricades! I can put twelve hundred volts into that railing. (<span class="smcap">Helena</span> <i>is playing Rachmaninoff’s Elegie off</i> <small>L.1</small>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Where’s Busman? (<span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>has left window and is walking up and down stage across front.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Downstairs in the office. He’s working out some calculations.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> I’ve called him. We must have a conference. (<i>Crosses to</i> <small>L.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Thank God Madame Helena can still play. (<span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>crosses to</i> <small>L.1</small> <i>door, opens it slightly and listens to music. Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Busman</span> <small>L.2</small>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Look out, Bus⁠—look out for the wires.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> What’s that you’re carrying?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> (<i>Laying the books on the table</i> <small>L.C.</small>) The ledger, my boy. I’d like to wind up the accounts before⁠—before⁠—(<span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>crosses up to window.</i>) Well, this time I shan’t wait till the New Year to strike a balance. What’s up? (<i>Goes to window</i>) Absolutely quiet.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Can’t you see anything?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Nothing but blue⁠—blue everywhere.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> That’s the Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> The Robots are unloading <i>firearms</i> from the <i>Amelia</i>.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Well, what of it? How can I <i>stop</i> them? (<i>Returns to</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>table, sits and opens ledger.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> We can’t stop them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Then let me go on with my accounts. (<i>Goes on with his work.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Picks up telescope</i>) Good God! The <i>Ultimus</i> has trained her guns on us.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Who’s <i>done that</i>?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> The Robots on board.</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> H’m, then of course⁠—(<i>Pause</i>) Then⁠—then that’s the end of us. (<i>To</i> <small>R.</small> <i>corner of desk.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> You mean?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> The Robots are practised marksmen.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Yes. It’s inevitable. (<i>Pause.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> (<i>Swinging around; looking into room. Pause</i>) That was criminal of old Europe to teach the Robots to fight. Damn them. Couldn’t they have given us a rest with their politics? It was a crime to make soldiers of them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> It was a crime to make Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Quietly. Down</i> <small>C.</small>) No, Alquist, I don’t regret that even today.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Not even today?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Dreamily</i>) Not even today, the last day of civilization. It was a colossal achievement.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> (<i>Sotto voce</i>) Three hundred sixty million.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>From window</i>) Alquist, this is our last hour. We are already speaking half in the other world. That was not an evil <i>dream</i> to shatter the servitude of labor. The dreadful and humiliating <i>labor</i> that man had to undergo. Work was too hard. <i>Life</i> was too hard. And to overcome that⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Was not what the two Rossums dreamed of. Old Rossum only thought of his Godless tricks, and the young one of his milliards. And that’s not what your R. U. R. <i>shareholders</i> dream of either. They dream of dividends, and their dividends are the ruin of mankind.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> To Hell with your dividends. (<i>Crossing</i> <small>R.</small> <i>in front of couch</i>) Do you suppose I’d have done an hour’s work for them? It was for myself that I worked, for my own satisfaction. I wanted man to become the master. So that he <i>shouldn’t</i> live merely for the crust of bread. I wanted not a single soul to be broken by other people’s machinery. I wanted nothing, nothing, nothing to be left of this appalling social structure. I’m revolted by poverty. I wanted a new generation. I wanted⁠—I thought⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Well?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Front of couch</i>) I wanted to turn the whole of mankind into an aristocracy of the world. An aristocracy nourished by millions of mechanical slaves. Unrestricted, free and consummated in man. And maybe more than man.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Superman?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Yes. Oh, only to have a hundred years of time. Another hundred years for the future of mankind.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> (<i>Sotto voce</i>) Carried forward⁠—four hundred and twenty millions. (<span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>sits on couch.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>Pauses⁠—back of couch</i>) What a fine thing music is. We ought to have gone in for that before.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Gone in for what?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Beauty, lovely things. What a lot of lovely things there are. The world was wonderful, and we⁠—we here⁠—tell me, what enjoyment did we <i>have</i>?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> (<i>Sotto voce</i>) Five hundred and twenty million.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Life was a good thing, life was⁠—(<i>Looking out of window. Directly to</i> <span class="smcap">Fabry</span>) Fabry, switch the current into that railing.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Why? (<i>Rushes to electric installation at</i> <small>L.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> They’re grabbing hold of it. (<span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>rises⁠—straightens up</i>. <span class="smcap">All</span> <i>rise.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Connect it up.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Fine, that’s doubled them up. Two, three, four killed.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> They’re retreating. (<span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>sits.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Five killed.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall</span> (<i>Pause</i>) The first encounter.</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> They’re charred to cinders, my boy. Who says we must give in? (<i>MUSIC stops.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<span class="smcap">Alquist</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>sit. Wiping his forehead</i>) Perhaps we’ve been killed this hundred years and are only ghosts. It’s as if I had been through all this before, as if I’d already had a mortal wound here in the throat. (<i>Looking at each as he speaks</i>) And you, Fabry, had once been shot in the head. And you, Gall, torn limb from limb. And Hallemeier knifed.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Fancy me being knifed. (<i>Looks at each. Then speaks</i>) Why are you so quiet, you fools? (<i>Steps down</i>) Speak, can’t you?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> And who is to blame for all this?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Nobody is to blame except the Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> No, it is <i>we</i> are to blame. You, Domin, myself⁠—all of us. For our own selfish ends, for profit, for progress, we have destroyed mankind. Now we’ll <i>burst</i> with all our greatness.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Rubbish, man. Mankind can’t be wiped out so easily.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> It’s our fault. It’s our fault. (<i>Rises, coming</i> <small>R.</small> <i>of</i> <span class="smcap">Gall</span>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> No! I’m to blame for this, for everything that’s happened. (<i>He leaves the window and comes down to end of couch.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> You, Gall?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> I changed the Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> What’s that?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> I changed the character of the Robots. I changed the way of making them. Just a few details about their bodies. Chiefly⁠—chiefly, their⁠—their irritability.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Damn it, why?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> What did you do it for?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Why didn’t you say anything?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> I did it in secret. I was transforming them into human beings. In certain respects they’re already <i>above</i> us. They’re stronger than we are.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> And what’s that got to do with the revolt of the Robots?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Everything, in my opinion. They’ve ceased to be machines. They’re already <i>aware</i> of their <i>superiority</i>, and they hate us as they hate everything human.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Perhaps we’re only phantoms.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Stop, Harry. We haven’t much time, Doctor Gall.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Fabry, Fabry, how your forehead bleeds where the shot pierced it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> (<i>Crosses to</i> <span class="smcap">Gall</span>) Be silent! Doctor Gall, you admit changing the way of making the Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Yes.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Were you aware of what might be the consequences of your experiment?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> I was bound to reckon with such a possibility.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> (<i>Amusing</i>) Why did you do it, then?</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p class="center">(<span class="smcap">Helena</span> <i>enters</i> <small>L.1</small>.)</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> For my own satisfaction. The experiment was my own.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> That’s not true, Doctor Gall! (<i>Crosses to couch.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Rises</i>) Helena, you? (<i>Crosses to her</i>) Let’s look at you. Oh, it’s terrible to be dead. (<i>He rises and crushes her in his arms.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Stop, Harry.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> No, no, Helena, don’t leave me now. You are <i>life</i> itself.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> No, dear, I won’t leave you. But I must tell them. Doctor Gall is not guilty.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Excuse me. Gall was under certain obligations.</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> No. He did it because I wanted it. Tell them, Doctor Gall⁠—how many years ago did I ask you to⁠—?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> I did it on my own responsibility.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Don’t believe him. I asked him to give the Robots souls.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> This has nothing to do with the soul.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> That’s what he said. He said that he could change only a physiological⁠—a physiological⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>From up at window</i>) A physiological correlate?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Yes. But it meant so much to me that he should do even that.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Why?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> I thought that if they were more like us they would understand us better. That they couldn’t hate us if they were only a little more human.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Nobody can hate man more than man.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Oh, don’t speak like that, Harry. It was so terrible, this cruel strangeness between us and them. That’s why I asked Gall to <i>change</i> the Robots. I swear to you that he didn’t want to.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> But he did it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Because I asked him.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> I did it for myself as an experiment. (<i>Up to window.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> No, Doctor Gall! I know you wouldn’t refuse me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Why?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> You know, Harry.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Yes, because he’s in <i>love</i> with you⁠—like all of them. (<span class="smcap">Fabry</span> <i>up to window. Pause.</i> <span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>takes her in his arms.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Good God, they’re sprouting up out of the earth. Why, perhaps these very walls will change into Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> (<i>Rises; crosses to</i> <span class="smcap">Gall</span>) Gall, when did you actually start these tricks of yours?</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Three years ago.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Aha. And on how many Robots altogether did you <i>carry out</i> your improvements? (<i>Walking to and fro.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> A few hundred of them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Ah! That means for every million of the good old Robots there’s only one of Gall’s improved pattern. (<i>Back to table</i> <small>L.C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> What of it? (<i>Crossing around</i> <small>L.</small>, <i>he stands upstage in the</i> <small>L.2</small> <i>doorway.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> That it’s of no consequence whatsoever.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Busman’s right. (<span class="smcap">Helena</span> <i>sits in armchair</i> <small>R.</small> <i>of</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>table.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> I should think so, my boy; but do you know what is to blame for this lovely mess?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> What?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> The number! (<i>Crosses to</i> <small>L.</small> <i>of</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>table</i>) Upon my soul, we might have known that some day or other the Robots would be stronger than human beings, and that this was bound to happen. And we were doing all we could to bring it about as soon as possible. You, Domin, you, Fabry, myself⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Are you accusing us? (<i>Turning on him.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Oh, do you suppose the management controls the output? It’s the demand that controls the output.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> And is it for that we must perish?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> That’s a nasty word, Madame Helena. We don’t want to perish. I don’t, anyhow. (<i>He sits</i> <small>L.</small> <i>of table.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> No? What do you want to do?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> I want to get out of this, that’s all.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Oh, stop it, Busman.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Seriously, Harry, I think we might try it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> How? (<i>To front again.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> By fair means. I do everything by fair means. Give me a free hand and I’ll <i>negotiate</i> with the Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> By fair means?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> (<i>Rises</i>) Of course. For instance, I’ll say to them: “Worthy and Worshipful Robots, you have everything. You have intellect, you have power, you have <i>firearms</i>. But we have just one interesting screed, a dirty old yellow scrap of paper⁠—”</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Rossum’s manuscript? (<i>Interest from</i> <span class="smcap">All</span>. <span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>is at</i> <small>C.</small>, <i>near couch</i>. <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>is up at window</i> <small>C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Yes. “And that,” I’ll tell them, “contains an account of your illustrious origin, the noble process of your manufacture and so on. Worthy Robots, without this scribble on that paper you will not be able to produce a single new colleague. In another twenty years there will not be the living specimen of a Robot whom you could exhibit in a menagerie. My esteemed friends, that would be a great <i>blow</i> to you, <i>but</i> if you will let all of us human beings on Rossum’s Island go on board that ship we will <i>deliver</i> the factory and the secret of the process to you in return. <i>You</i> allow <i>us</i> to get away, and <i>we</i> will allow <i>you</i> to <i>manufacture</i> yourselves. That, worthy Robots, is a fair deal. Something for something.” That’s what I’d say to them, my boys. (<i>Sits.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Crosses to</i> <small>C.</small>) Busman, do you think we’d sell the manuscript?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Yes, I do. If not in a friendly way, then⁠—either we sell it or they’ll find it. Just as you like.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Busman, we can <i>destroy</i> Rossum’s manuscript.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Then we destroy everything⁠—not only the manuscript but ourselves. Just as you think fit.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> There are over thirty of us on this island. Are we to sell the secret? And save that many souls at the risk of enslaving mankind⁠—</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Why, you’re mad. Who’d sell the <i>whole</i> manuscript?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Busman, no cheating! (<i>To</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>table.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Well then, sell, but afterwards⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Well?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Let’s suppose this happens. When we’re on board the <i>Ultimus</i> I’ll stop up my ears with cotton wool, lie down somewhere in the hold, and you’ll train the guns on the factory and blow it to smithereens, and <i>with</i> it Rossum’s secret.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> (<i>Rises</i>) No!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Busman, you’re no⁠—gentleman. If we sell them it will be a straight sale.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> (<i>Rises</i>) It’s in the interest of humanity to⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> It’s in the interest of humanity to keep our word⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Oh, come, what rubbish!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> This is a fearful decision. We are selling the destiny of mankind. Are we to sell or destroy? Fabry?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Sell.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Gall?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Sell.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Hallemeier?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Sell, of course.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Alquist?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> As God wills.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Starts off</i> <small>R.</small>) Very well, gentlemen.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Harry, you’re not asking <i>me</i>.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Stops. To her</i>) No, child. (<i>Starting</i> <small>R.</small>) Don’t you worry about it. (<i>He pats her shoulder.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Who’ll do the negotiating?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> I will. (<i>Up to window.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Wait till I bring the manuscript. (<span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>goes out</i> <small>R.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Rises</i>) Harry, don’t go! (<span class="smcap">Helena</span> <i>sits</i>. <span class="smcap">All</span> <i>look at her. Pause.</i>)</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> (<i>Looking out of window</i>) Oh, to escape you! you⁠—<i>matter</i>⁠—in revolt; oh, to preserve human life, if only upon a <i>single</i> vessel⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Don’t be afraid. (<i>Going to back of couch</i>) Madame Helena. We’ll sail far away from here; we’ll begin life all over again.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Oh, Gall, don’t speak.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> (<i>Crosses to</i> <small>L.</small> <i>of</i> <span class="smcap">Gall</span>) It isn’t too late. (<i>Going to</i> <small>L.</small> <i>of her chair</i>) It will be a little State with one ship. Alquist will build us a house and you shall rule over us.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>Crosses to</i> <small>L.</small> <i>of</i> <span class="smcap">Fabry</span>) Madame Helena, Fabry’s right.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Breaking down</i>) Oh, stop! Stop!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Good! (<i>Crosses to</i> <small>L.</small> <i>of</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>table</i>) I don’t mind beginning all over again. That suits me right down to the ground. (<i>Going through papers on table.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> And this little State of ours could be the center of future life. A place of refuge where we could gather strength. Why, in a few hundred years we could conquer the world again.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> You believe that even today?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Yes!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> <i>Amen.</i> You see, Madame Helena, we’re not so badly off.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Storms into</i> <small>R.</small> <i>To</i> <small>R.</small> <i>of couch. Hoarsely</i>) Where’s old Rossum’s manuscript? (<i>To</i> <small>R.C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> In your strong-box, of course.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Someone⁠—has⁠—stolen it!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Impossible.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Who has stolen it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Standing up</i>) I did. (<i>Reactions from</i> <span class="smcap">Fabry</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Where did you put it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Harry, I’ll tell you everything. Only forgive me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Where did you put it?</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Pointing to fireplace</i>) This morning⁠—I burnt⁠—the two copies.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Burnt them? Where⁠—in the fireplace? (<i>Goes to fireplace, followed by</i> <span class="smcap">Fabry</span>, <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Busman</span>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Throwing herself on her knees. By sofa, facing upstage</i>) For Heaven’s sake, Harry.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Going to fireplace</i>) Nothing⁠—nothing but ashes. Wait, what’s this? (<i>Picks out a charred piece of paper and reads, “By adding.”</i> <span class="smcap">Fabry</span>, <span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>move up to him.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Let’s see. “By adding biogen to⁠—” That’s all.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Is that part of it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> (<i>Carrying paper down and letting it fall</i>) Yes. (<span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>crosses to</i> <small>L.C.</small> <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>to</i> <small>R.</small> <i>of</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>table</i>; <span class="smcap">Fabry</span> <i>to window</i>; <span class="smcap">Busman</span> <i>to</i> <small>L.</small> <i>of</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>table.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> God in Heaven! (<i>Sits</i> <small>L.</small> <i>of table.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Then we’re done for. Get up, Helena.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Then you’ve forgiven me?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Get up, child. I can’t bear⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> (<i>Lifting her up</i>) Please don’t torture us.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Harry, what have I done?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> (<i>Coming to</i> <span class="smcap">Helena</span>) Don’t, Madame Helena.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Takes</i> <span class="smcap">Helena</span> <i>to couch. She sits.</i>) Gall, you couldn’t draw up Rossum’s formula from memory?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> It’s out of the question. Even with my recent experiments, I couldn’t work without referring to the formula⁠—(<i>At</i> <small>L.C.</small>) It’s extremely complicated.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Try. All our lives depend upon it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Without experiments it’s impossible.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> And with experiments?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> It might take years. Besides, I’m not old Rossum.</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> God in Heaven! God in Heaven!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Up to fireplace</i>) So then this was the greatest triumph of the human intellect. These ashes.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Harry, what have I done?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Comes to her</i>) Why did you burn it?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> I have destroyed you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> God in Heaven!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Sits</i> <small>R.</small> <i>of her</i>) Helena, why did you do it, dear?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> I wanted all of us to go away. I wanted to put an end to the factory and everything. It was so awful.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> What was awful?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> That children had stopped being born. Because human beings were not needed to do the work of the world. That’s why⁠—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Is that what you were thinking of? Well, perhaps in your own way you are right.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Wait a bit. (<i>Rising</i>) Good God, what a fool I am not to have thought of it before.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> What?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Five hundred and twenty millions in bank-notes and checks. Half a billion in our safe. <i>They’ll</i> sell for <i>half</i> a billion⁠—for half a billion they’ll⁠—(<i>Crosses to</i> <span class="smcap">Domin</span>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Are you mad, Busman?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> I may not be a gentleman, but for a half a billion⁠—(<i>Crosses back to</i> <small>L.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Where are you going? (<span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>clutches</i> <span class="smcap">Busman</span>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Busman.</span> Leave me alone. Leave me alone! Good God, for half a billion anything can be bought. (<span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>after him, then stop. He rushes out</i> <small>L.2</small>. <span class="smcap">Fabry</span>, <span class="smcap">Gall</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>to window.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> They stand there as if turned to stone⁠—waiting as if something dreadful could be wrought by their silence⁠—</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>Looking out window</i>) The spirit of the mob.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Yes. It hovers above them like a quivering of the air.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Oh, God! Doctor Gall, this is ghastly!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> There is nothing more terrible than the mob. The one in front is their leader. (<span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>crosses to window.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> (<i>Rises</i>) Which one? (<i>Rushing to window.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Point him out.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> (<small>L.</small> <i>window</i>) The one at the edge of the dock. This morning I saw him talking to the sailors in the harbor.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Doctor Gall, that’s Radius. (<i>Backing into the room, horror-stricken.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Yes.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Radius! Radius!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Could you get him from here, Fabry?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> I hope so.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Try it, then.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Good⁠—(<i>Draws his revolver and takes his aim.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena</span> (<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Fabry</span>) Fabry, don’t shoot him.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> He’s their leader.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Fire! (<i>Standing above table</i> <small>L.C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> Fabry, I beg of you. (<i>She goes to</i> <span class="smcap">Fabry</span> <i>and holds his arm.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> (<i>Pause. Lowering the revolver</i>) Very well.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> It was Radius’ life I spared.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Do you think that a Robot can be grateful? (<i>Pause.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Busman’s going out to them.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> He’s carrying something. Papers. That’s money. Bundles of money. What’s that for?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Surely he doesn’t want to sell his life. (<i>He rushes to window</i> <small>C.</small>) Busman, have you gone mad?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> He’s running up to the railing. Busman. Busman.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>Yelling</i>) Busman, come back.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> He’s talking to the Robots. He’s showing them the money.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> He’s pointing to us.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Helena.</span> He wants to buy us off.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> He’d better not touch the <i>railing</i>.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Now he’s waving his arms about.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Busman, come back!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Busman, keep away from that railing. Don’t touch it, damn you. Quick, switch off the current. (<span class="smcap">Domin</span> <i>runs to</i> <small>L.</small> <span class="smcap">Helena</span> <i>screams and</i> <span class="smcap">All</span> <i>drop back from the window.</i>) The current has killed him.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> (<i>Pause</i>) The first one. (<i>Still in chair down</i> <small>R.</small> <span class="smcap">Helena</span> <i>sits in chair at window.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> Dead, with half a <i>billion</i> by his side. (<i>Crosses down to table</i> <small>L.C.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> All honor to him. He wanted to buy us life. (<i>Crosses to chair</i> <small>L.</small> <i>Pause. WIND machine begin.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Do you hear?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> A roaring. Like a wind. (<i>To</i> <small>L.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> Like a storm.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> (<i>Lighting the table lamp at table</i> <small>L.C.</small>) The dynamo is still going⁠—our people are still <i>there</i>.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> It was a great thing to be a man. (<i>Facing lamp from up</i> <small>C.</small>) There was something <i>immense</i> about it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> (<i>Facing the lamp</i>) From man’s thought and man’s power came this light, our last hope. (<i>Leaning over lamp.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>Facing lamp</i>) Man’s power! May it keep watch over us. (<i>Leaning over lamp.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> (<i>Facing lamp</i>) Man’s power.</p>
			<p/>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>At corner of table down</i> <small>L.C.</small> <i>Facing lamp</i>) Yes! A torch to be given from hand to hand from age to age forever! (<i>The LAMP goes out. EXPLOSIONS.</i>)</p>
			<p>
				<span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span>
				<i>The end.</i>
			</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> The electric works have fallen! (<i>Terrific EXPLOSIONS outside. More EXPLOSIONS.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> In here, Helena. (<i>He takes</i> <span class="smcap">Helena</span> <i>off through door</i> <small>R.</small> <i>and re-enters</i>) Now quickly! Who’ll be on the lower doorway?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Dr. Gall.</span> I will. (<i>Rushes out</i> <small>L.2</small>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> (<i>Near couch</i>) Who on the stairs?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Fabry.</span> I will. You go with her. (<i>Going out</i> <small>L.2</small>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> The ante room?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> I will. (<i>He rises and goes toward the</i> <small>L.1</small>.)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Have you got a revolver?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Yes, but I won’t shoot.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> What will you do, then?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> (<i>Going out</i> <small>L.1</small>) Die.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> I’ll stay here. (<i>EXPLOSIONS. Rapid firing of MACHINE GUN from below.</i>) Go to her, Harry.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Yes, in a second. (<i>Gets from fireplace and examines two Browning guns.</i>)</p>
			<p class="right">(<i>WARN Curtain.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> Confound it, go to her.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Domin.</span> Goodbye. (<i>Exits</i> <small>R.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Hallemeier.</span> (<i>Alone</i>) Now for a barricade quickly! (<i>Drags an armchair, sofa and table to</i> <small>R.</small> <i>door</i>) The damned devils, they’ve got bombs. I must put up a defense. Even if⁠—even if⁠—Don’t give in, Gall. (<i>As he builds his barricade</i>) I mustn’t give in⁠—without⁠—a⁠—struggle. (<i>A</i> <span class="smcap">Robot</span> <i>enters through windows at back. The</i> <span class="smcap">Robot</span> <i>jumps down from balcony and stabs</i> <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span> <i>in the back. Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Radius</span> <i>from balcony.</i>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Robot.</span> (<i>Standing up from prostrate form of</i> <span class="smcap">Hallemeier</span>) Yes. (<i>Other</i> <span class="smcap">Robots</span> <i>enter from all doors. A revolver SHOT off</i> <small>L.</small>)</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> Finished them all⁠—</p>
			<p>
				<span class="smcap">Robots.</span>
				<i>Yes, yes, yes.</i>
			</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Two Robots.</span> (<i>Dragging in</i> <span class="smcap">Alquist</span> <small>L.1</small>) He didn’t shoot. Shall we kill him?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> No. Leave him!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Robot.</span> He is a man!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> He works with his hands like the Robots.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Alquist.</span> Kill me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Radius.</span> You will work! You will build for us! You will serve us! (<span class="smcap">Radius</span> <i>climbs on the balcony</i>) Robots of the world⁠—(<span class="smcap">Robots</span> <i>straighten up.</i>) the power of man has fallen. A new world has arisen, the rule of the Robots, march. (<i>On the line: “Robots of the world”</i> <span class="smcap">All Robots</span> <i>turn quickly, automatically to attention, facing</i> <span class="smcap">Radius</span>, <i>who is standing. On the words: “The rule of the Robots,” they stand there with their arms vibrating high in the air. They form in two lines, turn to audience and march mechanically to the footlights. As they are about to step over the footlights, as if into the audience, all LIGHTS go out. The</i> <span class="smcap">Robots</span> <i>immediately step back from the Curtain line as the Curtain falls.</i>)</p>
			<p class="center">CURTAIN</p>
			<hr class="chap"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
