<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Dramatis Personae</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="dramatis-personae" epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dramatis Personae</h2>
			<p>
				<b>In order of appearance:</b>
			</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Harry Domin, General Manager of Rossum’s Universal Robots</p>
					<p>
						<i>A handsome man of 35. Forceful, efficient and humorous at times.</i>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Sulla, a Robotess</p>
					<p>
						<i>A pathetic figure. Young, pretty and attractive.</i>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Marius, a Robot</p>
					<p>
						<i>A young Robot, superior to the general run of his kind. Dressed in modern clothes.</i>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Helena Glory</p>
					<p>
						<i>A vital, sympathetic, handsome girl of 21.</i>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gall, head of the Physiological and Experimental Department of <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism" class="eoc">R.U.R.</abbr></p>
					<p>
						<i>A tall, distinguished scientist of 50.</i>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fabry, Engineer General, Technical Controller of <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism" class="eoc">R.U.R.</abbr></p>
					<p>
						<i>A forceful, competent engineer of 40.</i>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hallemeier, head of the Institute for Psychological Training of Robots</p>
					<p>
						<i>An impressive man of 40. Bald head and beard.</i>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Alquist, Architect, head of the Works Department of <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism" class="eoc">R.U.R.</abbr></p>
					<p>
						<i>A stout, kindly old man of 60.</i>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Consul Busman, General Manager of <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism" class="eoc">R.U.R.</abbr></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Nana</p>
					<p>
						<i>A tall, acidulous woman of 40.</i>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Radius, a Robot</p>
					<p>
						<i>A tall, forceful Robot.</i>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Helena, a Robotess</p>
					<p>
						<i>A radiant young woman of 20.</i>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Primus, a Robot</p>
					<p>
						<i>A good-looking young Robot.</i>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>A Servant</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>First Robot</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Second Robot</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Third Robot</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p>
				<b>Note</b>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i>All the Robots wear expressionless faces and move with absolute mechanical precision, with the exception of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sulla</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Primus</b>, who convey a touch of humanity.</i>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
